# Property

Using Hedgehog, the programmer writes assertions about logical properties that a function should fulfill.

Take [`List.rev`](https://msdn.microsoft.com/visualfsharpdocs/conceptual/list.rev%5b%27t%5d-function-%5bfsharp%5d) as an example, which is a function that returns a new list with the elements in reverse order:

```fs
List.rev [1; 2; 3];;

val it : int list = [3; 2; 1]
```

One logical property of `List.rev` is:

* Calling `List.rev` twice must return the elements in the original order.

Here's an example assertion:

```fs
List.rev (List.rev [1; 2; 3]) = [1; 2; 3];;

val it : bool = true
```

## A generic assertion

In the previous example `List.rev` was tested against an example value `[1; 2; 3]`. To make the assertion generic, the example value can be parameterized as *any list*:

```fs
fun xs -> List.rev (List.rev xs) = xs;;

val it : xs:'a list -> bool when 'a : equality = <fun:clo@33>
```

Hedgehog will then attempt to generate a test case that *falsifies* the assertion. In order to do that, it needs to know which generator to use, to feed `xs` with random values.

## A generator for lists of integers

Values for `xs` need to be generated by a generator, as shown in the *Generators* sections. The following one is for lists of type integer:

```fs
let g = Range.constant 0 100 |> Gen.int32 |> Gen.list (Range.linear 0 20);;
val g : Gen<int list>
```

Every possible value generated by the `g` generator must now be supplied to the assertion, as shown below:

## A first property

```fs
fun xs ->
    List.rev (List.rev xs) = xs
    |> Property.ofBool
|> Property.forAll g;;

val it : Property<unit>
```

>But what is `forAll`? This comes from [predicate logic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_quantification) and essentially means that the assertion holds *for all* possible values generated by `g`.

## Properties can also be created using the `property` expression

Here's how the previous property can be rewritten:

```fs
property {
    let! xs = g
    return List.rev (List.rev xs) = xs
}
```

## Try out (see it pass)

```fs
let g = Gen.list (Range.linear 0 100) Gen.alpha
let propConfig =
    PropertyConfig.defaultConfig
    |> PropertyConfig.withTests 500<tests>

property {
    let! xs = g
    return List.rev (List.rev xs) = xs
}
|> Property.renderWith propConfig
|> printfn "%s";;

>
+++ OK, passed 500 tests.

```

The above property was exercised 500 times. The default is 100, which is what `Property.render` does:

```fs
let g = Gen.list (Range.linear 0 100) Gen.alpha

property {
    let! xs = g
    return List.rev (List.rev xs) = xs
}
|> Property.print

>
+++ OK, passed 100 tests.

```

>Outside of F# Interactive, you might want to use `Property.check` or `Property.checkWith`, specially if you're using Unquote with xUnit, NUnit, MSTest, or similar.

## Try out (see it fail)

```fs
let tryAdd a b =
    if a > 100 then None // Nasty bug.
    else Some (a + b)

property { let! a = Range.constantBounded () |> Gen.int32
           let! b = Range.constantBounded () |> Gen.int32
           return tryAdd a b = Some (a + b) }
|> Property.render
|> printfn "%s";;

>
*** Failed! Falsifiable (after 3 tests and 24 shrinks):
101
0

```

The test now fails. — Notice how Hedgehog reports back the minimal counter-example. This process is called shrinking.

## Reporting

Sometimes, it's useful to run a property and deal with the result programmatically. For example, if you wanted to
implement custom reports, or reports for another tool to consume (`JUnit` reports, or an HTML representation). This can
be done with the series of `Property.report*` functions. There are currently 8 variations of these functions:

- `report` &mdash; Checks a `Property<unit>` and creates a report.
- `reportWith` &mdash; Checks a `Property<unit>` with a specific configuration and creates a report.
- `reportBool` &mdash; Checks a `Property<bool>` and creates a report.
- `reportBoolWith` &mdash; Checks a `Property<bool>` with a specific configuration and creates a report.
- `reportRecheck` &mdash; Rechecks a `Property<unit>` and creates a report.
- `reportRecheckWith` &mdash; Rechecks a `Property<unit>` with a specific configuration and creates a report.
- `reportRecheckBool` &mdash; Rechecks a `Property<bool>` and creates a report.
- `reportRecheckBoolWith` &mdash; Rechecks a `Property<bool>` with a specific configuration and creates a report.

Internally, Hedgehog calls these functions from the `Property.check*` and `Property.recheck*` functions and pretty
prints the report to `stdout`.

The report itself can be inspected to find metrics about the run, including the number of tests, discards and the
overall result (`OK`, `GaveUp`, `Failed`). Upon a `Failed` status, more information can be retrieved about the nature
of the failure. This data includes the `Size`, and `Seed` of the shrinked counter example, as well as the number of
shrinks and a `Journal` containing log messages.

Here is an example of using `Property.report` to implement custom reports:

```fsharp
let integerGen = Gen.int32 (Range.constantBounded ())
let prop = property {
    let! x = integerGen
    return x < 100
}

let report = Property.report prop

match report.Status with
| OK -> printfn "Test succeeded! %d tests, %d discards" report.Tests report.Discards
| _ -> eprintfn "Test failed."
```
